---
layout  : wiki
title   : "Systematic review of privacy-preserving distributed machine learning from federated databases in health care"
summary : 
date    : 2022-01-25 16:01:30 +0900
updated : 2022-01-25 16:26:43 +0900
tag     : 
toc     : true
public  : true
parent  : [[index]]
latex   : false
---

# Systematic review of privacy-preserving distributed machine learning from federated databases in health care

Covered topics include (1) an introduction to privacy of patient data and distributed learning as a potential solution to preserving these data, a description of the legal context for patient data research, and a definition of machine/deep learning concepts; (2) a presentation of the adopted review protocol; (3) a presentation of the search results; and (4) a discussion of the findings, limitations of the review, and future perspectives.

Currently, a combination of regulations and ethics makes it difficult to share data even for scientific research purposes. The issues relate to the legal basis for processing and anonymization. Specifically, there has been reluctance to move away from informed consent as the legal basis for processing toward processing in the public interest, and there are concerns about the re-identification of individuals where data are de-identified and then shared in aggregated environments. A solution could be to allow researchers to train their machine learning programs without the data ever having to leave the clinics, which in this paper we have established as distributed learning. This safe practice makes it possible to learn from medical data and can be applied across various medical disciplines. A limitation to its application, however, is that medical centers need to be convinced to participate in such practice, and regulators also need to know suitable safeguards have been established. Moreover, as can be seen in Table 2, even with the use of distributed learning, the size of the data pool learned from remains rather small. In the future, the integration of blockchain technology to distributed learning networks could be considered, as it ensures transparency and traceability while following FAIR data principles and can facilitate the implementation of distributed learning.

* Table 2: 다기관 분산 기계 학습 사용례
