---
layout  : wiki
title   : "An introduction to GLM Chapter 12"
summary : "Chapter 12. Bayesian analysis"
date    : 2022-02-16 06:00:15 +0900
updated : 2022-02-21 06:10:20 +0900
tag     : 
toc     : true
public  : true
parent  : [[2022-01-10-introduction_GLM]]
latex   : false
---

## 12.1 Frequentist and Bayesian paradigms

### 12.1.1 Alternate definitions of p-values and confidence intervals

1) A p-value is the probability of observing more extreme data given that the null hypothesis is correct.
2) A 95% confidence interval is an interval that contains the true value on 95% of occasions, if the random process could be repeated many times.

Alternative, rely on just the actual observed data.  

1) A p-value is the estimated probability that the null hypothesis is true, given the observed data.
2) A 95% CI is an interval that contains the true value with a probability of 0.95

### 12.1.2 Bayes' equation

* Equation 12.1
$$P(\theta|\mathbf{y})=\frac{P(\mathbf{y}|\theta)P(\theta)}{P(\mathbf{y})}$$

* Equation 12.2
$$P(\theta|\mathbf{y})\propto P(\mathbf{y}|\theta)P(\theta)$$

posterior probability of $\theta$, $P(\theta|\mathbf{y})$, as a function of the likelihood,  
and prior, $P(\theta)$.  

Under Bayesian methodology the parameter is a random variable and the data are fixed.

### 12.1.3 Parameter space

This range of possible values is called the parameter space and is denoted by $\Theta$.  
* Equation 12.3
$$P(\theta|\mathbf{y})=\frac{P(\mathbf{y}|\theta)P(\theta)}{\sum P(\mathbf{y}|\theta)P(\theta)}$$

Bayes' equation evaluates the combination of likelihood and prior of a specific value for $\theta$ relative to every other value.  

### 12.1.4 Example: Schistosoma japonicum

## 12.2 Priors

Bayesian methodology = prior + observed data to create posterior.  
Equation 12.2 shows that the posterior estimate of $\theta$ is dependent on a combination of the data and the prior probability.  
If the prior is constant for all values of $\theta$ so that $P(\theta)=c$ - uniformative prior

### 12.2.1 Informative priors

We started by believing that hypothesis $H_1$ was much more likely.

### 12.2.2 Example: Sceptical prior

기존 항암제에 비해 새 항암제는 전문가들이 기대하기로는 종전의 2년 생존률 0.15에서 10% 절대치가 상승한 0.25가 될 것임 - `enthusiastic prior`  
`skeptical prior` - 이전 임상 실험을 보면 그렇게 크게 성공하지 못했음, 0.25가 되는 것은 0.05의 확률로 일어날 것임  

**Conjugacy**: The property of the posterior distribution having the same form as the prior distribution

### 12.2.3 Example: Overdoses amongst released prisoners

Beta distribution

## 12.3 Distributions and hierarchies in Bayesian analysis

extra layer from adding a parameter below a prior.

## 12.4 WinBUGS software for Bayesian analysis

